Proposing changes/updates to the RFC process. (#109)
HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community: rfcs/text/0000-rfc-process-updates.md

**rfc-deprecated** : This indicates that the design is no longer implemented or executed in the DCP and has been usurped by a newer design or process. Note that the deprecated label is not standalone; it may be used in conjunction with  "rfc-approval" label for example.

**rfc-paused** : This indicates that an RFC has been paused for further refinement. This roughly implies that an RFC has gone from being in a review status to a "pre-rfc" status and should not be reviewed further until designated so.

**rfc-withdrawn** : This label is applied when an RFC has not finished the review process (and therefore has not been  explicitly rejected) but has been voluntarily withdrawn.

Like the existing RFC process, any change of state to the RFC must be announced on the DCP slack channel. Also note that labeling an RFC has no implications on whether the PR is open or closed. Generally, RFCs in a terminal state (i.e. "approved", "declined", or "withdrawn").

### 2. Reduce the RFC minimum review time

> The current RFC process requires a minimum of 2 weeks in DCP Community Review followed by 1 week of DCP Oversight Review. The intention of the "Community" review is to receive feedback not from other DCP team members, but rather the  scientific community.

Reviewer: _The intention ... but rather the scientific community_ is an incorrect statement. Currently, community review includes team members and users. For example, community review is the time for developers to review a governance RFC.  I think that you could strike the _intention_ sentence. You have good points below that many RFCs are published when there's already consensus among the proposers which would allow us to shorten review period to two weeks.

In practice, most RFCs are reviewed as a free-for-all during the community review period and then is followed by one week of radio silence during the "Oversight" review period since almost all feedback will have been resolved during the community review period.

> We propose removing Oversight review altogether. A two week minimum community review period still exists but the  "community" refers to all members of the DCP working on any of the chartered organizations instead of the scientific community only. This largely reflects the behavior of the review process today.

Reviewer: To be precise, we don't have _chartered organizations_. We have _chartered projects_. 

_Each HCA DCP project must have a charter that specifies its scope, responsibilities, and leadership roles._ See the README - https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/tree/master/charters

pushed whenever needed. 

4 . Lack of followup post RFC publication:

Today, there is no requirement that RFCs must be related to any existing ticket in Zenhub which is usually a proxy for
determining critical work to be done in a quarter. This means that RFCs are published with no clear roadmap to
completion which also weakens the implication of the RFC. 

### User Stories

*Share the [User Stories](https://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/agile/user-stories) motivating this RFC.*

## Detailed Design

We propse the following edits to the RFC process to address 1-4 above.

1 . Limited states of an RFC:

We proposed adding the tags "pre-rfc-do-not-comment", "rfc-deprecated", "rfc-paused", and "rfc-withdrawn" as new tags with the following 
semantics:

"pre-rfc-do-not-comment" : This indicates that the authors are still actively working on the RFC, that the RFC is in a
draft state, and readers should **not** comment on the RFC yet. 

"rfc-deprecated" : This indicates that the design is no longer implemented or executed in the DCP and has been usurped
by a newer design or process.

> "rfc-paused" : This indicates that an RFC has been paused for further refinement. This roughly implys that an RFC has

Reviewer 2: Is the rationale for pausing instead of closing that comments would be maintained? Is there guidance for withdrawing paused RFCs to avoid a glut of open PRs that aren't actionable?

Author: So pausing and closing a PR are mutually exclusive and I haven't detailed any guidelines yet on closing since Dave and I still need to flesh this out. Tags can be applied to any PR whether open or closed and allows for ease of searching for a state of a PR.

Sorry, there are lots of things here that still need fleshing out :D Still under active development, but thank you for the early feedback!

Reviewer: As an example, I _paused_ the original Planning RFC after the Oversight Committee requested a roadmap from the Project Leads to understand its implications on planning and execution. Then I _withdrew_ the original RFC before Oversight Review because it was clear that the planning model would need to be redesigned and adapted to the availability of a long-term roadmap.

Author: Closing this thread as I believe it has been addressed, but please feel free to re-open if not!

gone from being in a review status to a "pre-rfc" status and should not be reviewed further until designated so.

"rfc-withdrawn" : This tag is applied when an RFC has not finished the review process (and therefore has not been 

> explicitly rejected) but has been voluntarily withdrawn due to extenuating circumstances.

Reviewer 2: I can imaging non-extenuating circumstances to withdraw. 

```suggestion
explicitly rejected) but has been voluntarily withdrawn.
```

 `[Name](mailto:username@example.com)`

## Motivation

Over the last year since the original RFC process was accepted, the DCP project has grown both in size and complexity.
As of this writing, 11 RFCs have been accepted in addition to many charters. Not so unexpectedly, there have been pain
points along the way of which we try to address a few via edits to the RFC process defined below.

### User Stories

*Share the [User Stories](https://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/agile/user-stories) motivating this RFC.*

## Detailed Design

### 1. Add additional RFC states

Currently the states of an RFC is one of:
 
 1. "rfc-community-review",
 1. "rfc-oversight-review", 
 1. "rfc-approved", or
 1. "rfc-declined." 

In practice, there have been cases where an RFC is no longer implemented (i.e. 
"deprecated") or an RFC has been withdrawn due to either incompleteness or having been published too early. 

Additionally, with the encouraged behavior of submitting draft pull requests prior to RFC readiness for review, there is no way to clearly designate the fact that the RFC should not be reviewed at all until the PR is no longer a draft.

We propose adding the following new tags: 
 

> **pre-rfc-draft** : This indicates that the authors are still actively working on the RFC, that the RFC is in a draft state, and readers should **not** comment on the RFC yet. Additionally this state serves to indicate more clearly the backlog of RFCs in development to avoid duplication of effort of overlapping RFCs and to help elicit offers of co-authorship.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't the simpler label `rfc-draft` or `draft-rfc` communicate the same info?

Author: Makes sense to me. I changed to `rfc-draft`. The one case for `pre-rfc-draft` is to use the term that is used colloquially (i.e. "pre-rfc") so that it's even more clear.

Author: Closing this thread as I believe it has been addressed, but feel free to re-open if not!

> **rfc-deprecated** : This indicates that the design is no longer implemented or executed in the DCP and has been usurped

Reviewer 3: RFC deprecation status probably needs to be indicated in the RFC document itself, since many of these RFCs will be found already merged in the `dcp-community` repo, not by digging through closed PRs.

Author: Added a note about this in the RFC Process itself which "recommends" making a change to the Summary section to indicate that the design is deprecated.

Reviewer 4: @maniarathi can you clarify the difference between deprecating vs. withdrawing an RFC? The description "the design is no longer implemented or executed in the DCP and has been usurped" sounds like a reason for wanting to withdraw an RFC.

Author: Sure! I see deprecated as having been already implemented and then replaced by a newer design or simply deleted. Withdraw means that the RFC was never approved in the first place.

Should this be made more clear in the RFC Process or in the explanation file?

Reviewer 4: Thanks for the explanation! I think it would be useful to clarify that in both places. I didn't see a section for deprecating RFCs in the process doc so it would be useful to add one!

Author: Added a section and clarified in the RFC Process MD file! Please let me know if it is still confusing :)

Author: Closing this thread as I believe it has been addressed, but feel free to re-open if not!

by a newer design or process.

**rfc-paused** : This indicates that an RFC has been paused for further refinement. This roughly implies that an RFC has
gone from being in a review status to a "pre-rfc" status and should not be reviewed further until designated so.

> **rfc-withdrawn** : This tag is applied when an RFC has not finished the review process (and therefore has not been 

Reviewer 3: Why not simply close the PR?

Author: I added a note that whether a PR is open or closed is largely independent from the tags.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @mweiden...just like an approved RFC is merged in, I would expect a withdrawn or deprecated RFC to be closed by the authors. The tags could still be useful to see why those PRs were closed.

Reviewer 4: ^ Nevermind, I see that is mentioned in `0001-rfc-process.md`

Author: Great! If all the concerns are addressed, may I resolve this conversation?

Reviewer 3: Resolving!

community only. This largely reflects the behavior of the review process today.

Extensions to the two week minimum will remain the same as dictated by the existing RFC process at the discretion of
the author(s) of the RFC.

### 3. Add an explicit process to make "trivial" edits to published RFCs

The original RFC process does not explicitly mention that minor edits (i.e. typos, re-wordings, etc.) are free to be pushed whenever needed. 

We propose to explicitly state that if there are minor/trivial edits to the RFC, such edits may occur at any time by the author(s) of the RFC without announcement.

### 4. Make the implementation status of RFCs more explicit

Today, there is no requirement that RFCs must be related to any existing ticket in Zenhub which is usually a proxy for determining critical work to be done in a quarter. This means that, at times,  RFCs are published/approved with no clear roadmap to completion which also weakens the implication of the RFC. 

We propose that, in order to ensure that RFCs are created based on critical tickets that are prioritized based on quarterly and yearly roadmaps and ensure that RFCs are followed up to completion, that all 

> [*non informational RFCs*](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/issues/30) be linked to an existing Zenhub ticket. Such a ticket should be linked to a timeline for RFC completion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[*non-informational RFCs*](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/issues/30) be linked to an existing Zenhub ticket. Such a ticket should be linked to a timeline for RFC completion.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> In addition, we propose adding an additional **optional** section to the RFC template: Timeline. This will allow the authors to propose a timeline for the work to be completed thus informing others of any conflicting priorities.

Reviewer 3: I think you have to be super clear that the timeline is not a commitment of the DCP as a whole at time of approval. You may also have to do some work here to connect this to our current prioritization process. Currently, an RFC is merged, then POs+TLs are supposed to talk and prioritize it.

Author: @mweiden. I made some adjustments in language to indicate that non-informational RFCs should be tied to a ticket but not informational RFCs. I also adjusted the language such that it is more of a recommendation at this point than a requirement. Does this sufficiently address your concerns?

Author: Will close this comment since I believe it has been addressed. Please feel free to reopen if not!

### 5. Make RFC authorship and RFC status more explicit in Zenhub
Currently, some RFC authors assign themselves the RFC PR in Github. This makes have to open the RFC to see who is driving it and makes it difficult to filter by author.

Additionally, the status of the RFCs is maintained by tags rather than by a Zenhub column making the backlog of each type of RFC more difficult to see at a glance. 

We propose to explicitly request that authors claim their RFCs by assigning themselves as authors in Github. 

> Additionally it is proposed to setup setup a custom Zenhub board with columns for each RFC state while maintaining tags to indicate the disposition at the terminal (closed) state. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, we propose setting up a custom Zenhub board with columns for each RFC state while maintaining tags to indicate the disposition at the terminal (closed) state. 
```

Keeping the voice consistent.

Author: Fixed, thanks!

`[dcp-community/rfc#](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/pull/<PR#>)`

# RFC Name

*Replace "RFC Name" above with the name of your RFC. Keep it short and descriptive.*

## Summary

The Data Coordination Platform (DCP) established the Request For Comments (RFC) process on 
[September 17th 2018](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/pull/26) in order to address the gap of having a
coordinated, standardized, and repeatable process by which decisions could be made. Since this time, the DCP has evolved
and likewise the RFC process is in need of some fine tuning. This RFC proposes some changes in order to reflect the new
DCP community's needs.  

## Author(s)

*Recommended format for Authors:*

 [Arathi Mani](mailto:arathi.mani@chanzuckerberg.com)
 
 [Dave Rogers](mailto:dave@clevercanary.com)

## Shepherd
***Leave this blank.** This role is assigned by DCP PM to guide the **Author(s)** through the RFC process.*

*Recommended format for Shepherds:*

 `[Name](mailto:username@example.com)`

## Motivation

Over the last year since the original RFC process was accepted, the DCP project has grown both in size and complexity.

> As of this writing, 11 RFCs have been accepted in addition to many charters. Not so unexpectedly, there have been pain

Reviewer: Not sure what charters has to do with the RFC process.

Author: I thought Charters also follow the RFC process?

Reviewer: Charters were _bootstrapped_ before the RFC process - https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/tree/master/charters - so they have their own process.

by a newer design or process. Note that the deprecated tag is not standalone; it may be used in conjunction with 
"rfc-approval" tag for example.

**rfc-paused** : This indicates that an RFC has been paused for further refinement. This roughly implies that an RFC has
gone from being in a review status to a "pre-rfc" status and should not be reviewed further until designated so.

**rfc-withdrawn** : This tag is applied when an RFC has not finished the review process (and therefore has not been 
explicitly rejected) but has been voluntarily withdrawn.

Like the existing RFC process, any change of state to the RFC must be announced on the DCP slack channel. Also note that
tagging an RFC has no implications on whether the PR is open or closed. Generally, RFCs in a terminal state (i.e.
"approved", "declined", or "withdrawn").

### 2. Reduce the RFC minimum review time

The current RFC process requires a minimum of 2 weeks in DCP Community Review followed by 1 week of DCP Oversight
Review. The intention of the "Community" review is to receive feedback not from other DCP team members, but rather the 

> scientific community.

Reviewer: That's incorrect - _Reviewers are DCP community members, including both software developers and users._ - For example, community review provides an opportunity for developers and technical leads to comment on governance RFCs which are then approved or rejected by DCP PM during oversight review.

Author: Just to make sure I understand completely, DCP Community Members = DCP software team + DCP PM team + DCP users?

Reviewer: Yes.

Author: Updated this definition to reflect my previous comment. Closing this accordingly, but please feel free to reopen if it is still unresolved.

In practice, most RFCs are reviewed as a free-for-all during the community review period and then is followed by one
week of radio silence during the "Oversight" review period since almost all feedback will have been resolved during the
community review period.

We propose removing Oversight review altogether. A two week minimum community review period still exists but the 
"community" refers to all members of the DCP working on any of the chartered organizations instead of the scientific

> community only. This largely reflects the behavior of the review process today.

Reviewer: Again, this statement is incorrect.

Author: Will correct once I get confirmation about the definition :)

Extensions to the two week minimum will remain the same as dictated by the existing RFC process at the discretion of
the author(s) of the RFC.

### 3. Add an explicit process to make "trivial" edits to published RFCs

The original RFC process does not explicitly mention that minor edits (i.e. typos, re-wordings, etc.) are free to be
pushed whenever needed. 

We propose explicitly stating that if an RFC warrants minor/trivial edits, such edits may occur at any time by the
author(s) of the RFC without announcement.

> ### 4. Elucidate RFCs' implementation status

Reviewer 5: In theory the RFC process was originally made to enable people external to the chartered DCP teams to be able to contribute. I don't think that contributors outside of our team would have prioritized roadmap work in ticketed form. I'm not sure how to resolve that with this recommendation.

Author: @kbergin Thank you for the feedback! You're right, a lot of the process around external contributors has been removed from this RFC because it has primarily been used for internal design communication.

I think it is warranted that we someday revisit the RFC process again once we actually have our first external contributor and have a sense of a reasonable process. Until then, it didn't make sense to have a process for an non-existent use-case.

Author: Closing this thread as I believe it has been addressed, but feel free to re-open if not!

Today, there is no requirement that RFCs must be related to any existing ticket in Zenhub which is usually a proxy for
determining critical work to be done in a quarter. This means that, at times, RFCs are published/approved with no clear

> roadmap to completion which also weakens the implication of the RFC.

Reviewer: I would use a different word than _roadmap_ in this case to avoid confusion with product roadmaps.

Author: Switched to "timeline" to match the section in the RFC template.

Author: Closing this thread as I believe it has been addressed, but feel free to re-open if not!

We propose that, in order to ensure that RFCs are created based on critical tickets that are prioritized based on

> the quarterly and yearly roadmaps and ensure that RFCs are followed up to completion, that all 

Reviewer: There are no _quarterly and yearly roadmaps_ - there is a multiple quarter or long term product roadmap that is refreshed on a quarterly basis.

Author: Switched to "long term product roadmap."

[*non-informational RFCs*](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/issues/30) be linked to an existing Zenhub

> ticket. Such a ticket should be linked to a timeline for RFC completion.

Reviewer: Tracked in [Tracking the implementation state of an RFC](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/issues/25) and more recently [RFC(s) should reference related Roadmap Objectives in ZenHub](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/issues/107)

In addition, we propose adding an additional *optional* section to the RFC template: Timeline. This will allow the
authors to propose a timeline for the work to be completed thus informing others of any conflicting priorities.

> 

Reviewer: See my related comments in the template.

Author: Replied to the comment in the template.

Author: Removed the Timeline section from the template, so will close this comment for now. Please feel free to reopen if this is no addressed to your satisfaction.

We propose adding the following new tags: 
 

**pre-rfc-draft** : This indicates that the authors are still actively working on the RFC, that the RFC is in a draft state, and readers should **not** comment on the RFC yet.

>  

Reviewer 6: I think all mention of pre-RFC should be dropped.  Any work leading up to an RFC should be outside of the scope of defining a formal document.  Without making it part of the formal process, it is just some way people want to work together to wirte the RFC.  It should not *count* as part of the RFC process and could be anything, even a photograph of a whiteboard, a verbal conversation.

People should be free to collaborate on writing an RFC in want ever way they choose.  This should not be dictated.

If the term pre-RFC is confusion, just ban it, don't make it part of the process.

Author: Fair enough :) The "pre" part of the tag has been dropped.

Reviewer 7: Hi @diekhans the intent here is to create a one stop shop for folks to see the backlog of rfcs that are currently being drafted. Folks can always keep whatever private docs or working groups they like if they prefer to work in secret.

Here we merely propose a formal way to optionally announce that the pre-rfc exists and that at the least describes the problem being addressed so that an interested party can contact the author(s) to discuss. Does adding "optional" to the text address your concerns?

Reviewer 6: comment below that didn't end up in the right place: I think proposed RFC is clearer than 'pre-RFC', as it indicates something someone is either working on or planning to work on.

Reviewer 8: Agree with @diekhans that pre-RFC shouldn't be part of the process. Would be good however to have a way of communicating what RFCs people are currently working on at the pre-stage (if they want to)

Reviewer 5: Why doesn't a github draft PR sufficiently clarify that something is a draft?

Reviewer: See [related issue](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/issues/94).

Author: @diekhans @barkasn I added language to indicate that drafting RFCs is not a required part of the process but simply encouraged. If folks feel more comfortable with Google Docs or the like, then that's on them. However, draft RFCs allow others to have a general sense of the work that is in progress and will hopefully encourage folks working on a similar problem to reach out to each other.

@kbergin I did the experiment on myself actually. This RFC was first published as a draft and yet it still received comments even though it wasn't ready to be reviewed in the least. Why Github doesn't make it clear... well that's not something I can control. But at least I can try to prevent folks from providing commentary before something is ready and still encourage collaboration. Commentary and collaboration are two different things and provide value in different ways so I'm trying to differentiate them and make the path to each contribution more clear if that makes sense.

Author: Closing this thread as I believe it has been addressed, but feel free to re-open if not!
